hi
today is not cinco de mayo
it is seis de mayo

Tension between congress and the president can arise when a president nominates people to jobs like federal judges, supreme court and lower court judges, ambassadors and diplomats, cabinet secretaries, but then the senate confirms them. This can cause some tension from negotiation and compromise. There are some positions that do not require senate confirmation which will lift tension.
Judicial appointments are the presidents longest lasting influence because they get that job for life. This is a hugely consequential decision and presidents desperately want to get judges confirmed that they agree with and that will rule in a way that the president will agree with as well.
The bully pulpit is the idea that because one is president people pay attention to what they say and do.  So presidents have a unique ability to always command the public's attention which they can use to put pressure on congress to make them do what the president wants. 
State of the union address is where once a year the president gives a speech to congress about what has happened in the country over the last year and what he wants to occur going forward into the future. He wants to get the public on his side to  put pressure on their congressman to support the president. 
Social media is now a tool to communicate quickly and directly with the public. This has been proven to be a very effective strategy of presidents avoiding the new media and going straight to the people.
Article 3 of the Constitution gives the judicial branch their powers. It is very vague and does not give that much information so we rely on Marbury vs Madison and federalist 78. In Federalist 78 Hamilton is arguing for judicial independence. He is saying that we need to make sure that the judicial branch is not reliant on the other two branches for their job or for their pay because we need the judicial branch to check the power of the other two branches. His solution is to give them life tenure so that they can not be fired or their pay cut because of the decision they are making. This is important because they need to rule in a neutral unbiased way and sometimes they need to use the power of the judicial review to strike down unconstitutional laws made by congress. In marbury vs madison the court says that they have the power to rule things unconstitutional because if a law goes against the constitution it is the court's job to say that the constitution is greater than the law. 
When justices are making their decision in a particular case they often look back at past decisions known as a precedent. A precedent is a ruling that will influence future cases that are similar. The court often follows precedent. Typically the court relies on precedents most of the time. 
Judicial restraint is the idea that the court should not be that powerful and should favor the democratic elected branches of government. It asserts that judges should hesitate to strike down laws unless they are obviously unconstitutional, though what counts as obviously unconstitutional is itself a matter of some debate.
Judicial activism says that the judicial branch should use judica; review and overrule other branches when wrong and should freely use their powers to advance societal goals.
Federal bureaucracy enforces and implements federal laws that congress passes. People who do the day to day job can be civil servants (not political jobs). 
There has been a shift in how people recieve a job. It used to be that political patronage so people would get jobs because of who you knew or how you vote which was very politically corrupt. This promoted expertise and neutrality within the bureaucracy. Merit system is designed to end the era of political patronization. This system means that the way those non-political people get their job by earning  it or passing the civil servant exam tells them they qualify for that job.
Within the bureaucracy there are four different types of bureaucratic agency.
 Cabinet departments are by far the largest  bureaucratic agency and have major responsibility over a broad area of policy. 
Executive agencies provide public service. For example the EPA (environmental protection agency) is an executive agency.
Independent regulatory commissions are able to make rules and regulations to regulate a specific industry or sector of the american economy, 
Government corporations provide some service that could be done by a private business but is not because it does not appear to be profitable so the government decides to do it instead so they provide that service.
Iron triangles are made up of congressional committees, interest groups, and bureaucratic agencies. Bringing all three together to make and influence policy. Interest groups which represent the public’s side of things, so that we want certain rules to be made. Then we have congressional committees make the laws. Bureaucratic agencies enforce laws and make this the specific regulations that go along with the law. (symbiotic relationship) Interest groups offer electoral support to congressmen, congressmen can provide favorable legislation to the interest group and provide funding to burcatic agencies, the agency can make rules and regulations that please the interest groups and congress. Each side is giving something as part of an exchange. 
Congressional oversight is the oversight by the United States Congress on the Executive Branch, including the numerous U.S. federal agencies. They want to make sure the agencies are enforcing the law the way congress intended them to do so. The most common way they exercise this oversight function is through committee hearings. They require the high level members of these committees to come to testify before their committee and inform them what is going on and they can decide whether they are pleased with what they hear. They also have the power of the purse which means they can either increase or decrease that agency's budget depending on whether they like or don't like what they hear.
In divided government, between the Senate, the House, and the president, at least one of them is from a different party than the other. Leads to policy gridlock.
Policy gridlock is where it is slower and more difficult for legislation to pass, tougher confirmation hearings, less legislation pass, fewer people confirmed to jobs and tougher to get things done in government. Policy gridlock is caused by a divided government. 
Reapportionment is changing the number of seats each state has in the house of representatives to make sure that it is still proportional according to populations.\
Congressional redistricting is done by the state legislators.
Gerrymandering occurs when state legislators draw maps in a bizarre shape to benefit their party. 
Filibuster is a long speech to prevent a bill from being passed
Cloture: a rule for limiting or ending debate in a deliberative body
Unanimous consent agreement: used by senate to speed along passage of legislation 
Committee chairs are the leaders of congressional committees and are always from the majority party 
The speaker of the house is the most powerful person in the house who takes the lead of the agenda, ( schedules bills for debate and votes), and makes sure his/her policies actually get passed. The speaker of the house is also always from the majority party.
The President of the Senate is also the vice president of the United States: this job only comes into use if there is a tie breaking vote but otherwise they aren't involved in the day to day operation of the senate.
The Senate majority leader is the most powerful person of the senate. They are like the senate's version of the speaker of the house. They are from the majority party.
The Commerce Clause expand congressional power by giving congress the ability to regulate interstate commerce and anything affecting  interstate commerce
Congress has the power of the purse which means they have the ability to spend money and to raise money.
 There are two types of federal spending: discretionary and mandatory spending. Discretionary spending (might pay) must be approved annually in which every year Congress will make a budget and they will appropriate money for certain things. If Congress doesn't pass a budget for discretionary spending then that money won't be spent. So Congress has control along with the president to increase or decrease this amount year to year. Mandatory spending (must pay) is money required by law, and money that Congress does not need to approve and appropriate annually, instead this will happen automatically without congressional action. So... if congress does nothing it will simply take place. 
Over ⅔ of all federal spending today is considered mandatory spending and it most commonly on entitlement programs. These programs provide benefits to people who are entitled to them by law. Examples: social security, medicare and medicaid. So the law says that if you meet these certain qualifications then you will receive social security or medicare.  
Congress can change mandatory spending but you would need new legislation and it is also often difficult and extremely controversial to change these programs because a lot of people are getting benefits from these programs.


One of the major functions of the Congress is to pass a budget for the executive branch to decide how much money the executive branch has to use to actually function. 
Appropriation committees in the house of representative and in the senate get to decide how much money goes to various departments and programs in the federal government. 
Earmarks 
Pork barrel legislation is laws that provide benefits such as  jobs, programs, money back to a congressman’s district.
Logrolling is an agreement by two or more lawmakers to support each other's bills. (vote trading). “You scratch my back and I'll scratch yours”. 


The Necessary and proper clause expands federal power by giving Congress the ability to make laws that are “necessary and proper” for executing their enumerated powers. 
Enumerated powers are explicitly written in the Constitution
Implied Powers are not directly written in the Constitution based on necessary and proper clause  
Brutus NO 1. Argued that power should be held by people in smaller more local governments
The Great Compromise created a bicameral legislature where the house is based on population and the Senate has 2 people per state.
Three/Fifths Compromise: slaves would count as ⅗ of a person for congressional representation purposes
Amendment process: ⅔ of congress can propose a constitutional amendment and ¾ of states ratify it
Delegated powers are powers that are given to the federal government
Reserved powers are powers that are kept by the states
Concurrent powers are powers held both by federal and state governments
Federal revenue sharing is federal money given to states with little or no strings attached.States can do whatever they want to do with that money
Federal mandates are rules that states must follow whether federal government provides money or not
Unfunded Mandate: the federal government does not give any money to the state and tells the state they have to do something
Funded mandate: the federal government gives money to the state and tells the state they have to do something




Natural rights- born with them
Limited Government: government power is restricted by the Constitution
Republicanism 
Participatory democracy: emphasizes broad participation and an active role for individual citizens
Pluralist democracy is a model of democracy in which no one group dominates politics and organized groups compete with each other to influence policy.
Elite democracy is a model of democracy in which a small number of people, usually those who are wealthy and well-educated, influence political decision making. ( discourages participation by the majority of citizens
Representative democracy - system of government in which all eligible citizens vote on representatives to pass laws for them
Popular sovereignty means that people are the source of governmental power and authority
The declaration of Independence was a forma; declaration of war between American colonies and Great Britain
